Add a help page for accessing project metadata via TDR (#1225) (#1242)
DataBiosphere/data-portal: content/guides/userguides/accessing-metadata-via-tdr.md

---
date: "2021-12-25"
description: "Overview of accessnig proejct metadata via the Terra Data Repository (TDR)."
draft: false
title: "Accessing Metadata via TDR"
---

# Accessing Metadata via TDR

The [Terra Data Repository](https://support.terra.bio/hc/en-us/sections/4407099323675-Terra-Data-Repository)
(TDR) offers a complete and authoritative source for the metadata made 

> available by the Data Portal data browser. This guide will walk you through the 

Reviewer: Is "Data Portal data browser" really the correct way to say this? Capitalization and redundancy feel very awkward.

Author: The existing guide pages fluctuate a bit in the name with examples like:
- https://data.humancellatlas.org/guides
  - `The Data Portal Explore page ...`
  - `... top of the Data Portal.`
- https://data.humancellatlas.org/guides/quick-start-guide
  - `... using the Data Browser ...`
  - `... The Explore section of the Data Portal provides an interactive data browser ...`
  - `... selecting various facets in the Browser's Organ, Method, Donor ...`
- https://data.humancellatlas.org/guides/consumer-vignettes/export-to-terra
  - `... search results from the HCA Data Explorer to ...`
  - `... use the HCA Data Explorer to find ...`
  - `... the Data Explorer will process ...`
- https://data.humancellatlas.org/guides/consumer-vignettes/matrices
  - `... matrices available from the Data Portal.`
  - `... the "Matrices" column of the DCP Data Browser ...`

I believe the overall site is the `HCA Data Portal` and the `/explore` page is the `DCP Data Browser`, so I will use the latter.

process of accessing metadata stored within TDR.

For detailed information regarding the structure of the data within TDR, see the
[Terra Data Repository schema](https://github.com/HumanCellAtlas/dcp2/blob/main/docs/dcp2_system_design.rst#terra-data-repository-schema).

> ## Running BigQuery SQL Queries

Reviewer: Consider moving this paragraph down so that it comes immediately before the section on writing the queries. That way the steps are laid out in the order a user would actually follow them.

Access to the metadata in TDR can be accomplished using [Google BigQuery](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/introduction).
Queries can be run via the Cloud Console or by using the command-line tool `bq`.
- [Using the Cloud Console](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/bigquery-web-ui)
- [Using the bq command-line tool](https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/docs/bq-command-line-tool)

> ## Finding a Catalog's Source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Finding a Catalog's Sources
```

Each project in the data browser belongs to a catalog. Each catalog consists of
one or more sources, and each source is composed of properties. These properties
include the name of the Google Cloud project and the name of the TDR snapshot.

> The source of a catalog can be obtained via the [Data Browser API](https://data.humancellatlas.org/apis/api-documentation/data-browser-api) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A catalog's sources can be viewed via the [Data Browser API](https://data.humancellatlas.org/apis/api-documentation/data-browser-api) 
```

`/index/catalogs` endpoint. 

Using `curl` to make the request, and `jq` to parse the response, the first step
is to identify the current default catalog.
```
$ curl -s https://service.azul.data.humancellatlas.org/index/catalogs | jq '.default_catalog'
"dcp11"
```

With the name of the catalog we can now parse out the catalog's source(s) from
the endpoint response.

```
$ curl -s https://service.azul.data.humancellatlas.org/index/catalogs | jq '.catalogs.dcp11.plugins.repository.sources'
[
  "tdr:tdr-fp-c315dee1:snapshot/hca_prod_20201120_dcp2___20211101_dcp11:/2"
]
```

In this example, there is one source for the `dcp11` catalog. The name of the
project (`tdr-fp-c315dee1`) and name of the snapshot (`hca_prod_20201120_dcp2___20211101_dcp11`)
can be extracted from the source following the syntax below.

```
"tdr:{PROJECT_NAME}:snapshot/{SNAPSHOT_NAME}:{prefix}"
```

Alternatively, the project and snapshot details can be obtained via the
[TDR API](https://jade-terra.datarepo-prod.broadinstitute.org/swagger-ui.html#/snapshots/enumerateSnapshots)

> `enumerate snapshots` endpoint. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure how useful/appropriate it is to include this link here. In order to search TDR for the relevant sources, the user would have to already know its name and/or ID, so I don't think it makes sense to present this as an alternative way to obtain that information. Perhaps just change the context so that this is presented as a way for users to learn more detailed information about the underlying snapshot if they want more info than is included in our API response.

## Example queries

Replace the following placeholders in the query with the appropriate value
prior to use:

- `{GC_PROJECT}`: The name of the Google Cloud project.
- `{SNAPSHOT}`: The name of the snapshot.

> - `{PROJECT_ID}`: The ID of a project in the Data Browser.

Reviewer: "Data Browser" is not capitalized elsewhere

To query for all subgraphs (links) in one project:

```
SELECT links_id, content
FROM `{PROJECT}.{SNAPSHOT}.links`
WHERE project_id = '{PROJECT_ID}'
```

To query for all specimen from organism(*) entities in one project:

(*) Note: This query can be adapted for other types of biomaterials such as cell
suspensions or donor organisms by replacing the values of the table name 
`specimen_from_organism` and ID field `specimen_from_organism_id`.

```
WITH contents AS (
    SELECT content
    FROM `{GC_PROJECT}.{SNAPSHOT}.links` AS links,
    UNNEST(JSON_EXTRACT_ARRAY(links.content, '$.links')) AS content
    WHERE links.project_id = '{PROJECT_ID}'
)
SELECT entity.specimen_from_organism_id, entity.content
FROM `{GC_PROJECT}.{SNAPSHOT}.specimen_from_organism` AS entity
WHERE entity.specimen_from_organism_id in (
    SELECT JSON_VALUE(input, '$.input_id') AS id
    FROM contents, UNNEST(JSON_EXTRACT_ARRAY(contents.content, '$.inputs')) AS input
    UNION ALL
    SELECT JSON_VALUE(output, '$.output_id') AS id
    FROM contents, UNNEST(JSON_EXTRACT_ARRAY(contents.content, '$.outputs')) AS output
)
```

To query for all analysis protocol(**) entities in one project:

> (***) Note: This query can be adapted for other types of protocols such as library

Reviewer: Nitpick: previous "Note" only used one asterisk.
